Snowflake private endpoint (#8921)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-versions/release-notes.md

- **Enhancement:** The Studio IDE now validates dbt YAML using <Constant name="fusion" /> aligned JSON Schema from [dbt-jsonschema](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-jsonschema) across [dbt platform release tracks](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks), including for development environments on <Constant name="core" />. This improves autocomplete and structural feedback in the editor. Diagnostics can occasionally disagree with what your environment accepts; use dbt runs and previews as the source of truth. For context, review [Migrate to the latest YAML spec](/docs/build/latest-metrics-spec) and [dbt YAML validation in Studio](/docs/cloud/studio-ide/develop-in-studio#dbt-yaml-validation). This will be a phased rollout starting the week of April 6th.
- **Enhancement:** The Studio IDE status bar now offers more control, more detailed information, and quicker access to settings for deferral, dbt version, and project status. For more information, refer to the [Studio IDE docs](/docs/cloud/studio-ide/ide-user-interface#the-command-and-status-bar). These updates roll out in phases to existing accounts starting April 6.

> - **Enhancement:** In Snowflake **Private endpoints**, output validation errors now display inline beneath the textarea (instead of as a page-level banner). The **Submit request** button is also disabled when the output is invalid (for example, empty, malformed JSON, or missing required fields).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Enhancement:** In Snowflake **Private endpoints**, output validation errors now display inline beneath the text area (instead of as a page-level banner). The **Submit request** button is also disabled when the output is invalid (for example, empty, malformed JSON, or missing required fields).
```

## March 2026

- **Enhancement:** The environment [Connection profiles](/docs/cloud/about-profiles#environment-profiles-table) page has been updated. The profile name is now a clickable button that opens the view/edit drawer, the Connection column links to the connection details page in a new tab, and in edit mode a **swap icon** button lets you change the assigned profile. The previous ellipsis menu has been removed. For details, refer to [About profiles](/docs/cloud/about-profiles).
-  **Beta:** Apache Spark is now supported in the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> CLI, enabling faster compilation and execution for Spark-based dbt projects. <Constant name="fusion" /> currently supports only Apache Spark 3.0. For more information, refer to [Connect Apache Spark to Fusion](/docs/local/connect-data-platform/spark-setup).

> - **Enhancement:** [Cost Insights](/docs/explore/cost-insights) charts now include an **Assets** filter (**Models** / **Tests** / **All**) on the **Cost**, **Usage**, **Query run time**, and **Builds** tabs. Use the dropdown on each chart to filter the data you want to view; your selection is stored per tab. The former **Model builds** tab is now labeled **Builds**. For more information, refer to the [Explore cost data](/docs/explore/explore-cost-data).

Author: ```suggestion
- **Enhancement:** [Cost Insights](/docs/explore/cost-insights) charts now include an **Assets** filter (**Models** / **Tests** / **All**) on the **Cost**, **Usage**, **Query run time**, and **Builds** tabs. Use the dropdown on each chart to filter the data you want to view; your selection is stored per tab. The former **Model builds** tab is now labeled **Builds**. For more information, refer to [Explore cost data](/docs/explore/explore-cost-data).
```

- **Enhancement**: The Model Timing tab displays an informative banner for <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> runs instead of the timing chart. The banner explains "Model timing is not yet available for Fusion runs" and provides context about threading differences. Non-Fusion runs continue to show the timing chart normally.
- **Behavior change**: [Snowflake plans to increase](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/release-notes/bcr-bundles/un-bundled/bcr-2118) the default column size for string and binary data types in May 2026. `dbt-snowflake` versions below v1.10.6 may fail to build certain incremental models when this change is deployed. [Assess impact and take any required actions](/reference/resource-configs/snowflake-configs#assess-impact-and-required-actions).

> - **New**: The new <Constant name="semantic_layer"/> YAML specification is now available on the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> **Latest** release track. For an overview of the changes and steps how to migrate to the latest YAML spec, visit [Migrate to the latest YAML spec](/docs/build/latest-metrics-spec).

Author: ```suggestion
- **New**: The new <Constant name="semantic_layer"/> YAML specification is now available on the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> **Latest** release track. For an overview of the changes and steps how to migrate to the latest YAML spec, refer to [Migrate to the latest YAML spec](/docs/build/latest-metrics-spec).
```

- **Behavior change:** New projects in trial, starter, or Enterprise accounts now default to **Fusion Latest** for all new environments with a supported adapter (Redshift, Snowflake, BigQuery, and Databricks). You can revert to another version by changing the dbt version in your [environment settings](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments#change-environment-settings).

## February 2026

- **New**: Advanced CI (dbt compare in orchestration) is now supported in the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />. For more information, review [Advanced CI](/docs/deploy/advanced-ci).

> - **Beta**: The `dbt-salesforce` adapter available in the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> CLI is now in beta. For more information, visit [Salesforce Data 360 setup](/docs/fusion/connect-data-platform-fusion/salesforce-data-cloud-setup).

Author: ```suggestion
- **Beta**: The `dbt-salesforce` adapter available in the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> CLI is now in beta. For more information, refer to [Salesforce Data 360 setup](/docs/fusion/connect-data-platform-fusion/salesforce-data-cloud-setup).
```

- **New**: [Python UDFs](/docs/build/udfs) are now supported and available in <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> when using Snowflake or BigQuery.
- **Enhancement:** Minor enhancements and UI updates to the <Constant name="studio_ide" />, file explorer that replicate the VS Code IDE experience.
- **Enhancement:** Profile creation now displays specific validation error messages (such as "Profile keys cannot contain spaces or special characters") instead of generic error text, making it easier to identify and fix configuration issues.
- **Private beta**: [Cost Insights](/docs/explore/cost-insights) shows estimated warehouse compute costs and run times for your dbt projects and models, directly in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" />. It highlights cost reductions and efficiency gains from optimizations like [state-aware orchestration](/docs/deploy/state-aware-about) across your project dashboard, model pages, and job details. Refer to [Set up Cost Insights](/docs/explore/set-up-cost-insights) and [Explore cost data](/docs/explore/explore-cost-data) to learn more.

> - **New**: The [dbt Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl) now supports [Omni](https://docs.omni.co/integrations/dbt/semantic-layer) as a partner integration. For more info, visit [Available integrations](/docs/cloud-integrations/avail-sl-integrations).

Author: ```suggestion
- **New**: The [dbt Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl) now supports [Omni](https://docs.omni.co/integrations/dbt/semantic-layer) as a partner integration. For more information, refer to [Available integrations](/docs/cloud-integrations/avail-sl-integrations).
```
